# Analysis-of-Drug-Overdose-Deaths-in-Middletown-CT
Excel and VBA Final Project: Accidental Drug Related Deaths Amongst

Middletown Residents

Team Members: Tara Pandey, David Mun, Colby Chan

We conducted our research with the intention of conducting a comprehensive exploration of drug-related deaths among citizens of Middletown, CT. This investigation seeks to uncover the demographic characteristics of individuals affected by drug-related fatalities and identify the primary substances used. The primary research question guiding this study is: What are the demographic characteristics and primary substances involved in drug-related deaths among residents of Middletown, CT?

Data
The dataset utilized in this analysis was obtained from data.gov and comprises recorded instances of accidental drug-related deaths in Connecticut from 2011 to 2021. To focus our analysis on Middletown, we filtered the relevant data onto a separate sheet. We employed functions such as IFS and ARRAYFORMULA for analysis. We created two new columns to identify the substances leading to the overdoses: “Drug Type” - which listed the drugs the overdose victims had taken - and “Drug Groupings” - which listed combinations of drugs with the title of the most common drug concatenated with “combination” or simply the name of the drug if there was only one. The primary components examined were age, date of death, and race/ethnicity. The dataset analyzed from data.gov can be accessed via the following link: https://data.ct.gov/Health-and-Human-Services/Accidental-Drug-Related-Deaths-2012-2022/ryb z-nyjw/about_data

Analysis and Findings:

Age Groupings
The data already included the age of each Middletown Resident. In order to assign each resident to an age grouping, we used an IFS function using an AND function for each if condition to check that the age listed was both greater than/equal to the minimum for the 10 year age range and less than the maximum for the 10 year age range. We added another column named, “Age Groupings” that listed what 10 year age range each age fit between. In order to better visualize our findings, we created a bar chart with the age groupings on the x-axis and the count for each grouping on the y-axis. The analysis revealed that individuals aged 50-60 accounted for the highest number of drug-related deaths, with a total of 53 fatalities from 2012-2022. The age groupings of 20-30 and 40-50 also experienced significant numbers of drug-related deaths, with 29 and 42 fatalities, respectively. Notably, individuals aged 70-80 had the lowest incidence of drug-related deaths, with only two fatalities recorded during the study period.

Over Time
The dates of each death/report was already included, to organize the data, we listed each death by date chronologically. Next, we created a column solely listing the year of each death with the YEAR function. To display the deaths over time, we created a pivot table that counted the number of deaths per year and then a line chart that plotted the number of deaths over time, according to year. The graph placed the years on the x-axis and the count of deaths per year on the y-axis. The analysis of temporal trends indicated variations in the number of drug related deaths over the years. Drug-related fatalities showed an overall increasing trend from 2012 to 2022, with a peak of 35 deaths recorded in 2021. The years 2020 and 2021 saw a notable increase in drug-related deaths compared to previous years. A potential contributor to this trend could be the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lockdowns were enforced in early 2020, which corresponds with the 165% increase in overdose deaths from 2019 to 2020. From 2019 to 2021, there was a 206% increase in deaths, which is apparent by the large peak on the graph in the year 2021. Due to an increase in mental health issues as a result of the isolation, COVID-related illness/deaths, lack of mobility due to lockdown, and major lifestyle shifts during the pandemic, we theorize that substance abuse increased during this time, leading to an increase in overdose deaths. In 2022, the number of overdose deaths was only 60% of the 2021 overdose death count. This was around the time COVID-19 restrictions loosened and people began leaving their houses and having more hope for the future, and likely developed a healthier relationship with drugs.

Race/Ethnicity
The race of all the Middletown overdose deaths fell into four categories: White, Black, Black or African American, and Unknown. Additionally, some of the White overdose deaths were listed as Hispanic under the Ethnicity column. In order to sort them between White Hispanic deaths and Non-White Hispanic deaths and to combine the Black categorization with the Black or African American categorization we implemented an IFS function in a column titled, “Updated Race”. In the IFS function, we checked if boxes in the Ethnicity column included text with “Hispanic”, and did not include “Not”. This accounted for the “Hispanic” groupings in the Ethnicity column and didn’t include the “Not Spanish/Hispanic/Latino” White overdose deaths. In order to group the “Black” and “Black or African American” deaths together, we looked simply for the word “Black”. We added a column that then recategorized the races into: White (not Hispanic), White Hispanic, Black, and Unknown.

We graphed the data through a pie chart in order to properly show the total race distribution of overdose deaths in terms of percentages. The majority of drug-related deaths were among individuals identified as White, not Hispanic, accounting for 147 fatalities. Black individuals accounted for 23 drug-related deaths, while Hispanic individuals accounted for 17 deaths. Only one death was categorized as "Unknown" in terms of race/ethnicity. In order to properly observe trends in this data, we compared these percentages to Middletown population data. According to the Middletown Local Government 2018 Town Profile, the percentage of White Alone, Non-Hispanic Middletown residents from 2012-2016 was 67.9%, the percentage of Black Alone residents was 12.2% and the percentage of Hispanic/Latino residents was 9.3%. According to the most recent US Census data, the Middletown population racial breakdown is 66.1% White Alone Non-Hispanic, 15.0% Black Alone, and 11.0% Hispanic. Compared to the pie chart data, which shows that of all Middletown overdose deaths from 2012-2022, 78.2% were White Non-Hispanic, 12.2% were Black, 9.0% were Hispanic White, and 0.5% were Unknown. White people made up disproportionately more of the percentage of overdose deaths than they make up of the Middletown population. Compared to the 2012-2016 population percentages, the percentages of Black and Hispanic overdose deaths populations were extremely similar. As for the 2023 Census Data (the most recently collected population data), there was a disproportionately smaller percentage of Black and Hispanic overdose deaths out of all overdose deaths than the percentages of the Black and Hispanic populations out of all residents.

Pivot Table
We explored the intersection of age distribution, demographic composition, and substances used by creating a pivot table that provides a breakdown of drug-related deaths by race/ethnicity, sex, and year. Our key findings are as follows: Among White, non-Hispanic females, their death count was particularly prominent, ranging from 1 to 8 across different years. Similarly, White, non-Hispanic males experienced a substantial number of drug-related deaths, with counts ranging from 5 to 19 in various years. Moreover, from 2019 to 2021, there is a noticeable increase in drug-related fatalities among White, non-Hispanic males. For example, in 2020 and 2021, there were 16 and 19 drug-related deaths.

Conclusion
Our study uncovered insights into the demographics and substance use patterns surrounding
drug-related deaths among Middletown residents. Notably, individuals aged 50-60 accounted for
the highest number of deaths, with a surge observed in 2020 and 2021, likely influenced by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Racial and gender disparities were evident, with White, non-Hispanic
individuals and males being disproportionately affected. Our findings emphasize the need for
targeted interventions to address substance abuse and promote community health and safety.
